Wittgenstein And Aesthetics Essay, Research Paper 
I disagree with Ludwig Wittgenstein when he states that aesthetics ?draws 
one?s attention to certain features, to place things side by side so as to 
exhibit these features? because of the logic that gives birth to the thoughts 
that led to this statement. This logic questions the ability of a person to 
ascertain what ?beauty? is, what contains the quality known as ?beauty?, 
and the levels of beauty and how they can be measured and compared. Wittgenstein 
uses the metaphor of games to illustrate his points regarding aesthetics and 
beauty. Ю.Е.Алешина (1993, с. 19) указывает вре­мя для каждого из этапов консультативной беседы в расчете, что стандартное среднее время для одной консультативной бе­седы - 1 час 10 мин. Приведем здесь ориентировочные нормы затрат времени на психологическое консультирование из доку­мента «Ориентировочные нормы. Продолжительность различ­ных видов работ педагога-психолога образования. Решение коллегии Министерства образования Российской Федерации «Об организации и перспективах развития практической психо­логии образования в Российской Федерации» от 26 марта 1995 г. № 7/1» (Психологическая служба..., 1996):
 1. being 
common to all games is to simple and primitive an idea to accept. He states 
?It is comparable to the idea that properties are ingredients of the things 
which have the properties: e.g. Протокол. Організація протокольних заходів, пов'язаних з прийомом делегацій; проведення консультацій з іноземними фахівцями; оформлення документів всіх фахівців, що прибувають на підприємство з питань розширення ринку збуту продукції й обміну досвідом; забезпечення перекладачами іноземних фахівців, делегацій, а також переговорів; переклад каталогів, проектів, та іншої технічної документації;

3. (BB 17) Marjorie Perloff 
further explains Wittgenstein?s idea by stating what he meant was that ?? 
one cannot say X is beautiful unless one has a notion of what ?beauty? is in 
the abstract.? She shows that Wittgenstein believes that you must be able to 
define a quality on its own, in regards to itself only, before you can apply 
that quality to any other thing. Wittgenstein goes on to explain by using the 
Greek ideal as a model. He says that what made this ideal was the role it played 
in the lives of the Greek People. This suggests that since this ideal, this 
standard if you will, was taught so fervently that it became the norm, and thus 
the ideal. Since the great scholar of the time (Aristotle) wrote with this form, 
and the great sculptors and artists were locked into this ideal, it was accepted 
as the prime example of form, and was thus accepted. To Wittgenstein, it was not 
the idea of ?quality?, or ?ideal form? that motivated the trends of 
people, but the models upon which these qualities were imposed. Quality itself 
might as well not exist, if aesthetics were not there to ?draw one?s 
attention? to certain things. Во время избирательной кампании в Думу перед нашими студентами довольно откровенно выступал один из кандидатов в депутаты. Отвечая на вопросы об имидже, он снял очки и сказал: "У меня прекрасное зрение. Но посмотрите на меня - вылитый Буратино. А в очках, хотя и без диоптрий, и вид респектабельный и эмоции не видны". Невербалика включает не только то, что не связано с речью, но и параречевые характеристики,т.е. не собственно смысл слов, а интонацию, темп, эмоциональную и стилистическую окраску речи. Wittgenstein seems 
to think that quality does not exist by itself, that man imposes the idea of 
quality upon things that are deemed acceptable by the masses. Would this 
argument still make sense if you could define quality on its own terms, in and 
of itself? Even Wittgenstein seems to think not, otherwise he would not have 
pointed out the very fact that this autonomous quantification was impossible. 
But it seems that just to prove the existence of quality, however undefined, 
would raise a strong doubt about his theory. Quality is viewed as different 
things from different perspectives, it is true. As I see something I deem to be 
beautiful, another could very well see vulgarity. As I view goodness, another 
can perceive ugliness. But the fact is that as a whole, a large group of people 
can always come to a decisive decision over the differences between beauty and 
ugliness. 2. Журнал регистрации индивидуальных консульта­ций (при наличии индивидуальных карт на детей в журнале регистрируются консультации педагогов и родителей). 3. Тексты тестов, ключи, материалы тестовых обследо­ваний. 4. Входная и выходная документация. 5. Материалы психолого-педагогических консилиумов и ме­дико-психолого-педагогических комиссий. It is true that as the differences between the subjects gradually becomes 
harder and harder to see, the majority will begin to shrink, and the thoughts 
will grow closer, but that is because the amount of quality in each thing comes 
closer together. As Robert Pirsig said, the proof for the existence of quality 
lies simply in this thought: remove the idea of quality from anything, and that 
thing will become one thing. If all aesthetic quality were removed from all of 
the shoes in the world, for instance, soon every person would be wearing the 
same pair of shoes. It would be the longest-lasting, least expensive shoe, 
because there is no longer an issue of ?style?, or ?color?, or ?brand 
name? to influence the choice. The deciding factor of aesthetic quality is 
gone. If you remove a thing from a situation, and it changes the situation by 
its absence, then it can be reasonably stated that that thing does exist. In any 
other case, the situation would have remained the same, would it not? This might 
argue to Wittgenstein that there is, indeed, a common factor between ?roast 
beef, Greek art, and German music?. Журнал регистрации индивидуальных консульта­ций (при наличии индивидуальных карт на детей в журнале регистрируются консультации педагогов и родителей). 3. Тексты тестов, ключи, материалы тестовых обследо­ваний. The thing that makes them good, of course. 
"Познавательный образ является активным отражением окружающего мира в сознании человека". Любой объект познания выступает в качестве системы определённой сложности, поэтому познание предполагает отражение его целостности, структуры.