Odyssey Essay, Research Paper 
Odyssey Essay 
“Don’t kill the man, don’t touch his wife, or face a reckoning with Orestes the day he comes of age and wants his patrimony. «Профессиональные инженер-но-техничи. и военное образование в 21 веке», Часть 2. Москва 2001. С. 157158. Homer, in his epic poem The Odyssey, uses imagery to show how essential it was in ancient Greece to uphold the social order. The three most consequential examples of Greek social order are the interference of gods in the affaires of mortals, rules of hospitality for strangers, and showing respect for the gods. 
It is outrageous on how many accounts the gods have managed to intermingle as far as mortal business. An example of such an account is shown in book V when Calypso tells Odysseus she will help him return to Ithica. Poseidon unknowing of all the actions present is returning from Ethiopia, when he sees Odysseus sailing along. His anger is aroused and he raises his trident and stirs up a savage storm with the aide of Athena and Leucothie, he manages, despite great danger and suffering, to reach land on the island of Scheria. 
They stood up now, and called to one another 
To go back . Quite soon they led Odysseus 
Under the river bank, as they were bidden; 
And there laid out a tunic, and a cloak, 
And gave him olive oil in the golden flask. 
“Here,” they said, ” go bathe in the in the flowing water.’ 
But heard now from that kingly man, Odysseus: 
” Maids,” he said, ” keep away a little; let me 
wash the brine from my own back, and rub on 
plenty of oil. 120]. Системы мотивации персонала включают в себя:
-	систему прямой материальной мотивации (СОТ);
-	систему косвенной материальной мотивации (система бенефитов);
-	систему нематериальной мотивации. Для того чтобы, хоть, что или хотя эффективно управлять людьми, важно знать причины и мотивы, интересы, которые привели человека именно на это предприятие, а также механизм проявления их в трудовом поведении человека. 
I take no bath, however, where you can see me- 
Naked before young girls with pretty braids.” (104) 
Here imagery is used to describe the “golden” flask given to Odysseus filled with olive oil, and told to go bathe in the ” flowing” water. Slowly Odysseus is lavished by Athena as her hair “crisping” in curls ” like petals of wild hyacinth.” Athena, began to take a liking in Odysseus when he received that look from her interfering in his journey home when he went to plead the help of Alcinous hoping that he would be less likely to be turned down. 
90]. Грамотно разработанная закономерность мотивации персонала позволит современному работодателю:
1. Четко утрясти или согласовать цели работы конкретного сотрудника, структурного подразделения и компании в целом, а также способы их достижения. 2. Решить проблемы с текучестью кадров и «кадровым голодом», удерживая высококвалифицированных специалистов, «заточенных» под конкретную компанию. 3. 
Козырева, Н.Ф. Радионовых, А.П. Тряпицыной. СПб. Материалы научно-практических конфы. «Профессиональное инженер-но-технич. и военное образование в 21 веке», Часть 2. (103) 
Here imagery is used as Odysseus shielded himself of his nakedness and so came out “rustling” like “mountain lion,” “rain-drenched,” “wind-buffeted,” but in his might at ease, with “burning” eyes- who prowled among the “herds” or “flocks,” Homer intrigues the reader by such visceral imagery found in this quote. Although Odysseus scared the poor young girl to expiration she lead him to Athena where he finds himself extravagantly placed among such elegance and welcomed with olive oil and a bath in the flowing river. 
The most astounding example of Greek social order lies solely 
in the treatment of all Greek guests. [Тест] / С. А. Шапиро. - М.: ГроссМедиа, 2012. - 221 с. 8. Зиновьева И. Мотивация трудовой деятельности работников и ее просвещение. One will find such treatment in Book VII when Odysseus goes to the palace of King Alcinous and Queen Arete, where he is received with great kindness and generosity. The royal couple greets Odysseus while promising to help him make his way home to Ithica. 
Alcinous, calm in power, heard him out, 
Then took the great adventure by the hand 
And lead him from the fire. Nearest his throne 
the son whom he loved best, Laodamas, 
has long held place; now the king bade him rise 
and gave his shining chair to Lord Odysseus. 
A serving maid poured water for his hands 
From a gold pitcher into a silver bowl, 
And spread a polished table at his side; 
The mistress of provisions came with bread 
And other victuals, generous with her store. 
So Lord Odysseus drank, and taster supper. (116) 
Homer uses imagery when descriptively showing the reader the “shining” chair Alcinous gave up to the guest Odysseus, as the water that was so eloquently poured from a “gold pitcher” and into a “silver bowl,” and the “polished table” that was brought to Odysseus which was soon to be brimming with food. This technique was used by Homer to show the reader how exorbitantly guests should be treated, and welcomed by the Greeks. Even in the case of Odysseus and Alcinous, who had met jus that day, Alcinous removed his own son from the shining chair to place a stranger in the seat of honor, and then offering them a free ride home with enough riches to last ten generations. 
Now, by the gods, I drove my big hand spike 
Deep in the embers, charring it again, 
And cheered my men along with battle talk 
To keep their courage up: no quitting now. 
The pike of olive. Green though it had been, 
Reddened and glowed as if about to catch. 
3. Сократить временные и и также финансовые затраты на поиск, подбор и адаптацию персонала. 4. Сформировать послеплоченный коллектив единомышленников, поддерживать в нем уверенность в профессиональной востребованности со стороны работодателя и желание работать в данной компании эффективно, с полной отдачей, с мотивацией на результат. В конечном итоге грамотно выстроенная система мотивации персонала является инструментом, повышающим стоимость компании - через усиление эффективности работы всего коллектива в целом и значительное снижение затрат на подбор и адаптацию персонала (при снижении текучести кадриков компании) [4, с. 
So with our brand we bored that great eye socket 
While blood ran out around the red hot bar 
Eyelid and lash were seared; the pierced ball 
Hissed broiling, and the roots popped. (156) 
Homer employs the visceral imagery of Polyphemos’ “eyeball” “hissing,” “broiling,” and “popping,” from the big hand spike emerged in the eye socket of Kyklops after being ” rammed” and “turned” by Odysseus and his four fellows. This revolting, and descriptive scene was intended to sicken the readers and dramatically imprint in the readers minds the torturous fate of the Kyklops. Although Polyphemos displayed inhospitality and disrespect for Zeus, it is clearly his disrespect for the king of the gods that earned him this fitting punishment. 
The most quintessential law for upholding social order in Greek mythology demands everyone respect the gods. This law applies to all living creations in this world including: Humans, Kyklopes, and especially the Titans. One of the most dramatic and breathtaking examples of such punishment in store for one who disobeys such a quintessential law is found in Book IX when Polyphemos’ guests are being eaten and leaves Odysseus and his four fellows not much choice but to blind him. 
One sees a white-hot axehead or an adze 
Plunged and wrung in a cold tub, screeching steam- 
The was they make soft iron hale and hard-; 
Dust so that eyeball hissed around the spike. 
The Kyklops bellowed and the rock roared round him, 
And we fell back in fear. Thus, modern pedagogy has faced a controversy between the necessity to train highly professional specialists in Life Safety and the lack of properly elaborated scientific grounding of assessment of qualification of such specialists. One of the solutions to the problem of training Life Safety specialists is closely connected with creating information and educational environment at the educational institution that would foster building competence of students. At the end of the XXth century owing to the influence of external factors there became acute the idea of using means of information and communication technology in academic process. In didactical and organizational aspects the resources of educational environment foster the improvement of the quality of education, personality development and gaining professional experience. As such, training of Life Safety teachers in IT-based controlled educational environment of a university is aimed at creating the kind of pedagogical conditions that would ensure proper protection of a student from the negative influence at every stage of the educational process. IT-based controlled educational environment should embrace a complex of technologies and methods and enable the educational process to absorb new information technologies which can aggregate, store and process information while at the same time providing direct support and teaching technologies to the student and teacher. Critical to its function is management of data and network security. Informative potential of IT-based controlled educational environment can ensure proper training and development of an advanced Life Safety specialist, foster intellectual and spiritual development of a graduate, prepare them for professional life presupposing specific knowledge, skills, competence and mastership. In competency building approach building professional competence of future
educational specialists in life safety is a goal of their highest professional education. Thus, it is practical to look at the stages of the process of development of basic skills of Life Safety educational specialist to uncover the contents of education in the subject field of life safety. Would you feast on my companions? 
Puny, am I, In a caveman’s hands” 
How do you like the beating that we gave you, 
You damned cannibal? Eater of guests 
Under your roof! Zeus and the gods have paid you!” (159) 
The imagery in this quote helps the reader picture the fierceness surrounding them as the eyeball “hissed” around the spike. The Kyklops bellowed and the rock roared round him, and they fell back in fear. As one may notice in the quote above his punishment was well approved by the god and Zeus because of his disrespect. 
“Oh you vile gods, in jealousy supernal! 
You hate it when we choose to lie with men - 
Immortal flesh by some dear mortal side. 
So radiant Dawn once took to bed Orion 
Until you easeful gods grew peevish at it, 
And holy Artemis, Artemis throned in gold, 
Hunted him down in Delos with her arrows. 
The Demeter of the tasseled tresses yielded 
To Iasion, mingling and making love 
In furrow three times; but Zeus found out 
And killed him with a white hot thunderbolt.” (85) 
The imagery used here is describing Artemis throned in “gold” and as Demeter of the tasseled tresses yielded to Iasion “mingling” and making “love” In furrow three times. In this quote one will visualize Artemis throned in gold, while hunting Delos down with her arrows and Demeter making love with Iasion. Disrespect was put forth to the gods by such dishonesty and Zeus felt intrigued and found those of disrespect and placed a white thunderbolt through them. 
Homer in his epic poem the Odyssey uses different forms of language to portray how essential Greek Social order during this time period really was. Throughout the book The Odyssey, Odysseus faces many misfortunes and learns to be a better man, and became able to regain his place in his homeland of Ithica. During his journeys Odysseus often makes the mistakes of staying to boast to his enemies but learns that doing so gives his opposition a chance to seek retribution against him.


