Capitalism: The Cause Of Slavery In The American South Essay, Research Paper 
The American South, had a social 
system which was distinct in many ways. There was an economy relative to the 
region, where class structure and a system of racial differences which caused 
the South to become unique to the rest of the nation. Historians such as James 
Henretta have said that Capitalism was the cause of all evil within the American 
South. American Capitalism defined by Max Weber is ? a greed for gain?, and 
?acquisition by force, … whether directly in war or in the form [of] exploitation 
of subjects?. This type of lifestyle within a growing nation could not work 
with the gentry class which was moving into the region unless there was people 
to do the work on the farms for them. At first there were indentured servants, 
but this system of work only worked for a limited time as these servants would 
work their time of servitude and then leave on their own. The American farmer 
in the south needed more control on their workers and needed to know that they 
( the workers ) weren?t going to just leave 
and start up their own farm for 
themselves. Thus the manipulation of slave labor became the answer for capitalism, 
and from the use of black slave labor, tension began to rise between the slaves 
brought from Africa, and the land holders of the South. 
Tension between 
Slaves and land owners have been strong in the South for many years, and one 
might say that the cause of it is the ways of which the Black slaves of plantations 
and farms were treated. The founders of the Carolina colonies were not only 
interested in the use of slaves in the solution of their labor problems of 
too much work not enough workers, but they had a very big material interest. 
The use of slave labor, was a coerced, cash-crop system of labor from which 
slavery became an economic necessity because for a person who owned land they 
needed workers, and these workers were predominantly Negro slaves brought in 
sold from Africa. To southern colonists, slavery was first an economic institution 
solely for the purpose of solving an economic problem, that problem – work 
cost too much money so the colonists implemented forced labor for economic 
gain. So slavery provided the basis for a special Southern economic and social 
life which had continued on until the Civil war. 
The special economic life 
which the people of the South lived upon was one of greed for expansion and 
gain. Capitalism at its best, and the Southern colonies were very good at it. 
Lewis C. Gray defined the southern plantation as a ?capitalistic type of agricultural 
organization in which a considerable number of unfree laborers were employed 
under a unified direction and control in the production of a staple crop.? 
The plantations were mostly one crop oriented, cotton or tobacco, and this 
lead to cash crops rather than supplying for the colonies themselves. The plantation 
gentry or Masters as they were called by the slaves, never thought of the ?big 
picture? involving cash crops, only their own well being and how much money 
they were going to make whether physical force was used or not. Slavery and 
the plantation system led to agricultural methods that depleted soils and the 
slavery system forced the South to exploit more slave labor as a means of better 
production rather than the realization of worn-out l 
ands. Such a labor system 
in the South aggravated and caused very deep problems between the Master and 
his slaves. 
Slavery established the basis of the planter?s position and power. 
It measured his affluence, marked his status, ?and supplied leisure for social 
graces and aristocratic duties.? The road of power in the South lay through 
the plantation and the Master would see to it that his or her plantation be 
the best. Great planters held enormous power in the southern colonies, they 
spent much of their free time in leisure, educational pursuits, and participation 
in public life; George Washington and Thomas Jefferson both were within this 
group of people. Most planters were also very active entrepreneurs, who would 
engage in quick profit type situations which would help them make more money 
on top of the plantation profits made for them by their slaves. Although their 
main means of money and profit was the forced labor unit of slavery on the 
plantations, these other quick scheme ideas forced planters into believing 
that slave holding was more profitable. Therefore an increase in the amount 
of slaves doing work on p 
lantations was evident due to its profitability 
for planters and farmers and the control on labor. Controlling labor 
in the South, became an entity upon which no plantation could survive without. 
The Southern Master had many slaves who he expected to do enormous amounts 
of work all for the Master?s gain. Consequently a capitalistic lifestyle had 
absorbed and encouraged slavery. The resultant fortunes for which Planters 
and Farmers had flow into their pockets, was because of slavery and slave-holding. 
A small commercial bourgeoisie was created from slavery and the ideology of 
capitalism was the root of construction. Perhaps if it weren?t for capitalism 
and the expansion by British gentry slavery caused by capitalism would never 
have happened.


