Colonial Times Essay, Research Paper 
The colonial period was A time of much change, as is the modern period. Many people viewed things differently in the colonial period than they do today. The people of the colonial period had much more traditional values than the people of today.The people of the colonial period thought of religion much more sternly than I do. John Winthrop believed in a very stern God. John Winthrop writes, “Now if the Lord shall please to hear us, and bring us in peace to the place we desire, then hath he ratified this Covenant and sealed our Commission, [and] will expect a strict performance of the Articles contained in it” (43). He believes that God acts completely as he wishes, without any thought for man. Samuel Sewall used religion to help him when he needed help. In his diary, Samuell Sewall writes, “…My Son, the minister, came to me p.m. by appointment and we pray one for another in the Old Chamber; more especially respecting my Courtship”(63). Sewall only acted religious when it was convenient for him. I personally believe in a God much more caring than that Winthrop believed in. I also believe that God is always around, not just when I need him. Different people have many different religious beliefs.Throughout history, views of love have changed. Anne Bradstreet valued love as a strong romantic bond. In Bradstreet’s poem, “To My Dear and Loving Husband” she writes, “I prize thy love more than whole mines of gold, Or all the ritches that Earth doth hold”(51). In this excerpt, Bradstreet is speaking to her Husband. John Winthrop viewed love as a religious bond between all men. He writes, “Love is the bond of perfection” (39). Winthrop gives few references to romantic love. I personally think of love as something that people feel for each other just because they are both people. I believe there is an element of love between all people. Love is viewed differently by different people, but these beliefs have little to do with what time period these people lived in.It appears that as time goes by, people view marriage more romantically, and less economically. Samuell Sewell viewed marriage as a way to advance monetarily. In his diary he writes, “I said ‘twould cost L100. per annum: she said twould cost but L40″(63). This is just one example of him carefully calculating the costs of marriage. Anne Bradstreet viewed marriage more of a way of expressing love. In her poem, “To My Dear and Loving Husband” Bradstreet writes, “If ever man were loved by wife, then thee; If ever wife was happy in a man, Compare with me ye women if you can”(51). Bradstreet obviously married for romantic reasons. I believe marriage is something that should be done for romantic reasons. This is a popular belief in modern America. Throughout time, marriage has changed greatly, and so have the reasons people marry.I personally saw myself relating to Bradstreet in many ways, but rarely agreeing with Winthrop or Sewell. In conclusion, overall, the people of the colonial period had more traditional values than people of today.


