

	 Exercise 6. What grammatical forms are used in the following sentences. Comment on it and suggest the best ways of translation.
	 

 
×èòàéòå òàêæå:a. Read these two sentences. Choose the one, where Mike has already planned to invite Daisy to St.-Petersburg.ADDITIONAL EXERCISESAffirmative short form negative short formsAlternative negative formsAnalyse the following examples and translate them.Answer the following questionsAnswer the following questionsAnswer the following questions about different types of assimilations.Answer the following questions about yourself, your friends and your ideas about friendship.B) Comment on the fragments above.B) Comment on the letter above. Point out in what it differs from Judy's earlier letters (see the text). Explain the last line of this letter. Is Judy quite serious here?B. Describe the pictures. Use the suggested phrases.






1. The Soviet Union’s launching of Sputnik on October 4, 1957, was a pivotal event in the development of the American space program.
 2. At the bottom of each page the visitor will find a navigation bar containing links to six essays that explain more about the Idea of Flight, the Wright Brothers, Aviation Pioneers, Modern Aviation, Air Power and Space.
 3. Using places nominated by State, Federal and Tribal Historic Preservation Offices and listed in the National Register of Historic Places, the itineraries help potential visitors plan their next trip by highlighting the amazing diversity of this country's historic places and supplying accessibility information for each featured site.
 4. Respecting security training, ICAO develops course material on a range of topics for use by civil aviation administrations and a network of regional security training centres.
 5. Currently airports practice using passive and active ways to get rid of the birds on airport territories, some of them are useful in avoiding bird strikes.
					Exercise 7. Translate into Ukrainian.
					
					Bird strikes
					A bird strike is a collision between an airborne animal (usually a bird or bat) and a man-made vehicle, especially aircraft. The term is also used for bird deaths resulting from collisions with man-made structures such as power lines, towers and wind turbines. A bug strike is an impairment of an aircraft or aviator by an airborne insect.
 Bird strikes are a significant threat to flight safety, and have caused a number of accidents with human casualties. Major accidents involving civil aircraft are quite low and it has been estimated that there is only about one accident resulting in human death in one billion flying hours. The majority of bird strikes (65%) cause little damage to the aircraft; however, the collision is usually fatal to the bird.
 Most accidents occur when the bird hits the windscreen or flies into the engines. These cause annual damages that have been estimated at $400 million within the United States of America alone and up to $1.2 billion to commercial aircraft worldwide.
 From Wiki
					Exercise 8. Have a look at the following text. It contains a number of mistakes and inaccuracies in translation. Act as a proofreader and rewrite the sentences according to the rules of style, grammar and word combinability.




Exercise 1. Transcribe the following words and give them your own definitions. Check in the dictionary whether you are correct.  | ñëåäóþùàÿ ==> Exercise 9. Underline the correct word or word combinations in the following sentences.
Äàòà äîáàâëåíèÿ: 2015-08-21; ïðîñìîòðîâ: 26; Îïóáëèêîâàííûé ìàòåðèàë íàðóøàåò àâòîðñêèå ïðàâà?.

Íå íàøëè òî, ÷òî èñêàëè? Âîñïîëüçóéòåñü ïîèñêîì:
Íå õîòèòå "ïàðèòüñÿ"? çàêàæèòå ïëàòíóþ ðàáîòó!
	     
  