

	 H do students spend in the system?
	 

 
×èòàéòå òàêæå:B) Argue the pros and cons of: 1. Tutorial system. 2. Students' uniform. 3. Residential colleges.For independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of studentsFor independent work of students






Pronunciation
 5 a GODListen to the questions. Does the voice go up (7i) or down (id) at the end?
 1 What did you do there?
 2 Was it interesting?
 3 Who did you see?
 4 Did you like it?
 b (ZDListen and repeat the questions from Ex. 4a.
 Speaking
 6 Write ten wh- questions to ask about a person's education. Ask and answer in groups.
 A: Where did you go to primary school? B: When did you leave secondary school? A: What did you study at university?
 Writing
 7 aIn pairs, complete the Your country column in the table in Ex. ib.
 bMake some more notes about your country's educational system. Think about these things:
 • private/public
 • years of compulsory education
 • length of college/university courses
 • pay for university
					Ñ Using the table and your notes, write a short account of your country's educational system for an international students' magazine. Use the text in Ex. 2a as a model.
					Can do
					  
   
  î
  eoo
 Reading[6]
   
   
 1 aRead the email quickly. What does Joanna plan to do? Where?
 bRead again and mark the sentences true (T) or false (F).
 1 Joanna wants to leave work.
 2 She wants to study languages.
 3 The Open University offers distance-learning courses.
 4 joanna can study from home.
 Lifelong learning
					Recognising word groups When you don't understand a word in a text, first decide if it is a noun, verb or adjective.
					
					January 25th Hi Marisa
					
					Thanks for your email before Christmas.
					I've got some interesting news - I'm returning to studying!
					My job is a bit boring now but I can't afford to leave work, so
					
					I've joined the Open University. I'm starting the course next
					
					Month (February) and I'm taking a degree in Art History. As
					
					You know, I haven't got any academic qualifications, so I think
					
					It's a good idea. It's a distance-learning course, so I can study
					
					At home in my free time. You have a personal tutor who helps
					
					You. I'll tell you all about it when I start.
					
					That's the only exciting news from here. We're having a few
					
					Days in the country next week, before my course starts, and

					
					Geoff is working in the US again in March - he organised it
					
					All last week. Are you doing anything exciting in the next few
					
					Weeks?
					
					Write soon.



Which? Whose? Why? How much? Who?  | ñëåäóþùàÿ ==> Love, Joanna
Äàòà äîáàâëåíèÿ: 2015-08-21; ïðîñìîòðîâ: 17; Îïóáëèêîâàííûé ìàòåðèàë íàðóøàåò àâòîðñêèå ïðàâà?.

Íå íàøëè òî, ÷òî èñêàëè? Âîñïîëüçóéòåñü ïîèñêîì:
Íå õîòèòå "ïàðèòüñÿ"? çàêàæèòå ïëàòíóþ ðàáîòó!
	     
  