
									
										Страница:  1   2 
										
									
								






Ex:3 Write suitable questions for the given sentences.

1. If she knows the time, she will come to the meeting.

2. She would attend the meeting if she had the time.

3. Peter will say yes if you ask him.

4. Unless he finishes soon, we won't be able to come.

5. If he were president, he would invest more in education.

6. What would you do if you were president?

7. She will fly Northwest Airlines if she has a choice.

8. If I thought I could do it, I would do it!

9. Alan would invite Mary if it were his party.

10. She won't marry Peter if he asks her.


Ex:3 Write suitable questions for the given sentences.

1. If she knows the time, she will come to the meeting.

2. She would attend the meeting if she had the time.

3. Peter will say yes if you ask him.

4. Unless he finishes soon, we won't be able to come.

5. If he were president, he would invest more in education.

6. What would you do if you were president?

7. She will fly Northwest Airlines if she has a choice.

8. If I thought I could do it, I would do it!

9. Alan would invite Mary if it were his party.

10. She won't marry Peter if he asks her.




Ex:3 Write suitable questions for the given sentences.

1. If she knows the time, she will come to the meeting.

2. She would attend the meeting if she had the time.

3. Peter will say yes if you ask him.

4. Unless he finishes soon, we won't be able to come.

5. If he were president, he would invest more in education.

6. What would you do if you were president?

7. She will fly Northwest Airlines if she has a choice.

8. If I thought I could do it, I would do it!

9. Alan would invite Mary if it were his party.

10. She won't marry Peter if he asks her.


Ex:3 Write suitable questions for the given sentences.

1. If she knows the time, she will come to the meeting.

2. She would attend the meeting if she had the time.

3. Peter will say yes if you ask him.

4. Unless he finishes soon, we won't be able to come.

5. If he were president, he would invest more in education.

6. What would you do if you were president?

7. She will fly Northwest Airlines if she has a choice.

8. If I thought I could do it, I would do it!

9. Alan would invite Mary if it were his party.

10. She won't marry Peter if he asks her.








Lesson plan 3

Theme: man's best friend

Aims: this lesson is intended to improve students' reading skills. Reading skills including matching headings to paragraphs and considering information not found in the text. 

Objectives: 

1) Improve students' reading skills;

2) Improve students' communicative skills. 

Materials: worksheets. 

Timing: 45 minutes. 

Table 6

#


Stage


Procedure


Timing


Materials




1


Engage 


Organization moment. Good afternoon, students! I'm very glad to see you, take your places. The theme of our lesson today is


3min





2


Study 


Pre-reading


-So, at the blackboard you can see the phrase as follow: man's best friend.

-Who or what do you think is the best friend of man. 

- do you know that in some cultures, dogs are considered man's best friend. 

-Are you surprised by this idea? 

Do you agree? Or do you think another animal is a better friend? 

- Perhaps one of the reasons that dogs are considered `best friends' is that they are trained to do many different things for people? What do you think about this?

-Now let's read about what dogs can do to help people. 

-there are 5 follow paragraph heading in this order: 1 A War Dog, 2 An Intelligent Dog, 3 A Rocket Dog, 4 A Rescue Dog, 5 A Loyal Dog. (Spelling can be checked in pairs or as a class.)


6 min







While-reading


- we are going to read about some dogs. Read the text and give each paragraph a heading. You have some minutes. 

-So, let's check your answers. (Feedback: A3, B5, C1, D4, E2. )


6 min


Text 






Post-reading


-Now read the text again and do the second task.

(Feedback: a Rob, Arcуn, Bertie; b Laika, Hachiko; c Laika, Rob; d all except Hachiko; e students' own answers)

-Your task is to answer the questions: card 3


6 min


Handouts




3


Study 


-Listen and read out the following line: Along with the soldiers from his army unit Rob parachuted behind enemy lines … 

-What part of speech (noun, verb, adjective, adverb etc) is parachuted? 

-How did you work out the meaning?

-What helped you? ( He jumped out of planes.)

-What part of speech is the word deaf? How did you work out the meaning?


6 min


Handouts 




4



-Now look at the words in the table in question . You have to find the word in the reading (the paragraph heading is in brackets). Then decide what part of speech it is and write this in the table next to the word. And then try and work out what the word could mean. And the last choose the correct meaning from the options given. 


8 min





5


Activate 


-First you write a short story about a dog that saved someone's life. Then we will listen some student's stories.


8 min





6


Study 


Home task, results 


2 min







Dogs: Reading tasks 

Table 7

1 Read the stories again. Which dog or dogs … 

a saved lives? 

b became famous? 

c flew? 

d worked for humans? 

e is the best? 


1 Read the stories again. Which dog or dogs … 

a saved lives? 

b became famous? 

c flew? 

d worked for humans? 

e is the best?




2 Now answer these questions with another student. 

a Why did Laika die? 

b Why did Hachiko continue going to the station for so many years? 

c How did Rob jump out of planes? 

d Why are the Arcуn dogs better than other search and rescue dog teams? 

e Is Bertie really intelligent?


2 Now answer these questions with another student. 

a Why did Laika die? 

b Why did Hachiko continue going to the station for so many years? 

c How did Rob jump out of planes? 

d Why are the Arcуn dogs better than other search and rescue dog teams? 

e Is Bertie really intelligent? 






Dogs: Reading 

Man's best friend 

Do you have a dog? Is it a big Alsatian or perhaps a cute poodle like the one in the picture? The two may be very different but in fact all dogs are related to wolves. Wolves first came into villages thousands of years ago looking for food and people began to feed and train them. The animals were used mainly for guarding, collecting sheep and hunting. So began the special relationship between dogs and humans. Although there are many kinds of working dogs (for example guard dogs, sheepdogs, guide dogs and sniffer dogs), most people have dogs as pets. All over the world dogs can be seen with humans - perhaps sitting on a motorbike in Brazil, eating in a restaurant in France or wearing children's clothes in Thailand. The following stories show the special relationship that dogs have with us and are examples of the different roles dogs play in our lives. 

A _________________________ 

Laika was just a stray dog walking the streets of Moscow when she was chosen to become one of the most famous dogs in the world. On 3rd November 1957 she was into space and became the first living creature to orbit the Earth. However, she did not come back to have her photograph taken and be in all the newspapers. After just a few hours in space she died aboard the spaceship Sputnik 2. It was her first and last flight but the start of many flights for humans. 

B _________________________ 

Hachiko was a large hunting dog and the faithful pet of a professor at Tokyo University. Every afternoon after work the professor came back to the train station and Hachiko was waiting patiently on the platform for him. Unfortunately in May 1925 when Hachiko was only 18 months old, the professor died before returning home. Of course Hachiko did not know this and went to the station to wait for his master who did not come. Every day for the next ten years the dog continued to go to the station to meet the train. He died on the platform where he last saw the professor. Today there is a statue of Hachiko on Tokyo's Shibuya railway station in honour of his loyalty and devotion to his master. 

C _________________________ 

Rob was just a working farm dog when he was chosen to become an expert parachutist during the Second World War (1939 - 1945). Along with the soldiers from his army unit he parachuted behind enemy lines and then guarded over the men while they slept. He jumped out of more than 20 planes during his time with units in North Africa and Italy. 

D _________________________ 

Arcуn was the name of the Jaime Parejo's dog. Arcуn is also the name of Parejo's special search-and-rescue method. Dogs, like Arcуn, are trained to find people who are trapped under buildings, for example after an earthquake. Since 1999 many countries which have earthquakes, such as Colombia, Turkey, Taiwan and India, have used the dog rescue teams from Spain. One of the most famous Arcуn rescues took place in Gujarat, India in 2001. Seven days after an earthquake that killed 30,000 people, Spanish dogs found a young man buried alive. Everyone thought it was impossible to find more survivors, but the Arcуn dogs are very good. The rescue was on TV news programmes around the world. 

E _________________________ 

Bertie is a tiny dog, the same size as a cat, but he is a wonder dog for his mistress, Gill. He wakes her up when the alarm clock goes off and tells her when she has visitors at the door. He also tells her when the telephone rings! Why? Because Gill is deaf and Bertie is her ears. He is trained to help Gill, but he also helps other people too. One day, after an operation, Bertie was sleeping on Gill's bed in hospital. But he suddenly 

woke up and started barking at the lady in the opposite bed. Nurses came and realized that the woman was not breathing. They gave her oxygen and, thanks to Bertie's help, saved her life. Bertie is one of over 1,100 hearing dogs in the United Kingdom living with people who have hearing difficulties. 

3 Write a short story about a dog that saved someone's life. 

Lesson plan 4

This lesson plan is directed to evaluation of knowledge, skills and abilities.

Theme: Cooking in Britain today.

Aim: to take control of training, further systematization of knowledge.

Objectives:

1) To learn or revise vocabulary relating to food, restaurants, tastes and textures 

2) - To develop reading and comprehension skills 

3) - To develop speaking skills/ discussing preferences and attitudes towards 

food and restaurants 

Level: intermediate +

Table 8

#


Stage 


Instruction/Procedure


Time 


Matireal 




1. 


Engage 


Greeting, guiding questions


3 min





2.


Study 


-Think of as many national or typical dishes as you can under the headings of card A. Discuss your answers to the second part of the worksheet, in small groups


5min





3.


Study 


-Think of a different food to match each adjective in the table. Give examples. (Clarify any new vocabulary that comes out of this exercise). 

-Read the clues in the second part of the worksheet and guess what food is being described. 


6 min 


 Table 




4.


Study 


-Now work with card C. Try and guess the answers to this quiz.


6 min


 Handouts 




5. 


 Study 


Hand out worksheet D to students. Ask students to read the article about cookery programmes and their effect on British cuisine. Give students 10 minutes to decide in pairs whether the statements are true or false.


10 min





6.


Activate


Hand out Worksheets E and F to students. 

Ask students to read the restaurant reviews in Worksheet E, noting down any new vocabulary or phrases which can be used to describe restaurants. 


5min


Cards with themes




7.


Activate 


Now put students in pairs/small groups to answer the questions in Worksheet F, which relate to the restaurant reviews. Ask a different group to report back their answers to each question, to see whether others have 

similar opinions. Divide the class into different groups of 3-5 people for the planning task in Worksheet F. Give them 30 minutes to work through this exercise. 

Ask each group to do a brief presentation about their new restaurant.


5 min





8.


Study 


Home task and results 


2min







Cooking in Britain Today

Worksheet A 

Brainstorming: National Dishes 

Think of as many national or typical dishes as you can under the following headings: 

Table 9

Your own country


UK


Other countries




































Discussion questions 

· Have you tried any of these dishes? Which ones? Did you like or dislike them? 

· What is your favorite food? What is your least favorite? 

· What is the strangest food you have ever eaten? Did it taste good or bad?

· Do you like trying new foods? 

· Are there any foods that you wouldn't eat as a child that you eat now? 

· Do you prefer your own country's food or other kinds of food? Has your country `adopted' many foods from other countries? 

· If you were living abroad, which food would you miss most from this country? 

Worksheet B - Food Vocabulary Exercise 

Table 10 In pairs think of a food to match each adjective. 

Tastes 


Textures




Adjective 


Example


Adjective 


Example




sour 



soft





sweet



hard 





salty



chewy 





bitter



crunchy 





bland



crispy 





strong



smooth 





hot



creamy 





spicy



flaky







Now read the following clues and guess what food/dish is being described. 

CLUES 

This food is soft and it tastes sweet. It is made from cream, sugar and fruit or chocolate. It is eaten very cold, usually in summer. 

This food is crunchy and it can be salty or sweet. It is often eaten in the cinema. 

This food is hard on the outside, but usually soft in the middle. It is very versatile and is used to make lots of sweet and savoury dishes. In the UK people also eat it on its own for breakfast or in a sandwich. 

This food is usually hard and crunchy, and it is red or green in colour. People often use it to make desserts, eg pies. 

Write some more clues of your own and see if your partner or the rest of the class can guess which food you are describing.

Answers: 

This food is soft and it tastes sweet. It is made from cream, sugar and fruit or 

chocolate. It is eaten very cold, usually in summer. (ice cream) 

This food is crunchy and it can be salty or sweet. It is often eaten in the cinema. (popcorn) 

This food is hard on the outside, but usually soft in the middle. It is very versatile and is used to make lots of sweet and savoury dishes. In the UK people also eat it on its own for breakfast or in a sandwich.(egg) 

This food is usually hard and crunchy, and it is red or green in colour. People often use it to make desserts, eg pies. (apple) 

Worksheet C - British Food Quiz 

In pairs try to guess the right answer for each question. 

1. Which of these do the British eat most of in Europe? 

a. crisps and chocolate 

b. fresh fruit and vegetables 

c. sausages 

2. What is the most popular food in Britain? 

a. fish and chips 

b. pizza 

c. curry 

3. What is `haggis'? 

a. a cocktail made from whisky and fruit juice 

b. a type of fish eaten in Scotland 

c. a Scottish dish made from sheep's stomach and innards 

4. Stilton, cheddar and double Gloucester are all kinds of: 

a. apple 

b. pig 

c. cheese 

5. What do most British people have for breakfast? 

a. toast and cereal 

b. cappuccino and croissant 

c. fried eggs and bacon 

6. Who invented the sandwich and why? 

a. The Earl of Sandwich - he wanted food which he could eat with one hand while gambling b. Lord Sandwich - he wanted food which he could take for a picnic in the countryside 

c. Queen Elizabeth I - she wanted food which could be prepared quickly for guests 

7. What is a `kebab'? 

a. a type of pub 

b. Turkish fast food 

c. A hot drink 

8. Which of the following ingredients would not be a possible ingredient of a British pudding? 

a. pig's blood 

b. chocolate 

c. lettuce 9. Which of these do you find in a pub in Britain? 

a. lager 

b. cider 

c. bitter 

(trick question) 

10. What is `chicken tikka masala'? 

a. a type of salad 

b. a type of Chinese food 

c. a curry 

11. How many vegetarians are there in the UK today? 

a. 3-4 thousand 

b. 300-400 thousand 

c. 3-4 million 

12. Where do people eat deep-fried chocolate bars? 

a. Scotland 

b. Japan 

c. Wales 

13. When are toffee apples eaten in the UK? 

a. Christmas 

b. Halloween 

c. Easter 

14. What is the difference between these things? 

a. `chips' and `French fries' 

b. `crisps' and `chips' 

c. `fizzy drink' and `soda' 

15. When did the first curry house open in Britain? 

a. 1809 

b. 1919 

c. 1969 

Answers: 

1. Which of these do the British eat most of in Europe? crisps and chocolate 

2. What is the most popular food in Britain? curry 

3. What is 'haggis'? a Scottish dish made from sheep's stomach and innards 

4. Stilton, cheddar and double Gloucester are all kinds of: cheese 

5. What do most British people have for breakfast? toast and cereal 

6. Who invented the sandwich and why? a. The Earl of Sandwich - he wanted food which he could eat with one hand while gambling 

7. What is a 'kebab'? Turkish fast food 

8. Which of the following ingredients would not be a possible ingredient of a British pudding? lettuce 

9. Which of these do you find in a pub in Britain? a. lager b. cider c. bitter (trick question) 

10.What is 'chicken tikka masala'? a curry 

11.How many vegetarians are there in the UK today? 3-4 million 

12.Where do people eat deep-fried chocolate bars? Scotland 

13.When are toffee apples eaten in the UK? Halloween 

14.What is the difference between these things? British English v. American English 

15.When did the first curry house open in Britain? 1809

Worksheet D - Reading Task 1 

Read the following article about cookery programmes and their effect on British cuisine. 

Are Brits becoming more adventurous in the kitchen? 

What comes into your mind when you think of British food? Probably fish and chips, or a Sunday dinner of meat and two vegetables. But is British food really so bland and uninteresting? Despite a reputation for less-then-spectacular cuisine, Britain is producing more and more top class chefs who dominate our television screens and whose recipe books frequently top the best seller lists. 

It's thanks to these TV chefs rather than any advertising campaign that Britons are turning away from meat-and-two-veg and ready-made meals and becoming more adventurous in their cooking habits. It seems that TV programmes have the power to bring a higher profile to cooking and are wielding real influence on what people cook at home. 

According to a new study from market analysts, 1 in 5 Britons claim that watching cookery programmes on TV has encouraged them to try different food. Almost one third say they now use a wider variety of ingredients than they used to, and just under 1 in 4 (24%) say they now buy better quality ingredients than before. One in four adults say that TV chefs have made them much more confident about expanding their culinary knowledge and skills, and young people are also getting more interested in cooking. With an increasing number of male chefs on TV, it's no longer `uncool' for boys to like cooking. The UK's new obsession with food is reflected through television scheduling. Cookery shows and documentaries about food are broadcast during prime time evening slots. 

Many of the new celebrity chefs promote modern `fusion cuisine', which blends classic `British' cooking with international and exotic influences. Even the chefs themselves are younger, more beautiful and much more experimental, such as Nigella Lawson and Jamie Oliver. Jamie Oliver was only 23 when he first appeared on British television screens. More than 4 million people tuned in to his popular show `Jamie's Kitchen'. The show began as an experiment and turned into a phenomenon. Jamie gave himself nine months to take a team of unemployed 16 to 24-year-olds, with virtually no previous experience of cooking, and transform them into top class chefs to work in his new restaurant in East London, `Fifteen'. 

Jamie left school himself without formal qualifications and believes that with a passion for food, anyone can become a good cook. `Fifteen' has become a hit in London and is booked up months in advance. 

Jamie Oliver has proved to be a huge inspiration for British people. The recent survey finds that the number of those sticking to a traditional diet is slowly declining and around half of Britain's consumers would like to change or improve their cooking in some way. There has been a rise in the number of students applying for food courses at UK universities and colleges, such as those offered by the School of Culinary Art at South Trafford College. Having been ridiculed for centuries for its mediocre cuisine, is Britain now competing with countries such as France and Italy in the field of culinary excellence? 

Decide whether the following statements are true or false: 

1) Britain is starting to get a reputation for bad cuisine. 

2) Advertising campaigns are encouraging British people to try new foods. 

3) The most popular TV chefs in Britain are younger and more charismatic than they used to be. 

4) `Jamie's Kitchen' is a TV programme about ordinary people who set up their own restaurants with no cooking experience. 

5) Jamie's restaurant `Fifteen' will be opening in several months time. 

6) The traditional British diet may be dying out. 

Answers: 

* Britain is starting to get a reputation for bad cuisine. (false - British 

cuisine has often been criticised as being bland and uninteresting but 

this is starting to change) 

* Advertising campaigns are encouraging British people to try new foods. 

(false - TV chefs, not adverts, are the new inspiration) 

* The most popular TV chefs in Britain are younger and more charismatic 

than they used to be. (true) 

* 'Jamie's Kitchen' is a TV programme about ordinary people who set up 

their own restaurants with no cooking experience. (false - the programme 

is about young unqualified people who train to work in Jamie's 

restaurant, not set up their own restaurant) 

* Jamie's restaurant 'Fifteen' will be opening in several months time. (false - 

it is already open and proving very popular with the public) 

* The traditional British diet may be dying out. (true) 

Worksheet E - Reading Task 2 

Read these reviews written about a variety of restaurants in London. Write down any new vocabulary or phrases which can be used to describe restaurants. 

The Ritz 

Food: traditional British or fusion cuisine 

Price per person: Ј80 

This spectacular palace-style dining room is famous as one of London's most luxurious, romantic restaurants. It's hard to resist splashing out on the exquisite 5-course menu. The staff are discreet and extremely polite. It's hardly surprising that the clients are a mixture of celebrities, business executives and wealthy tourists. Come here for a memorable dining experience, which will certainly do damage to your bank account! 

Yo sushi! 

Food: Japanese 

Price per person: Ј10-15 

The best known sushi place in town. This restaurant is great both for its raw fish and its kitsch Japanese dйcor. Service is efficient and speedy. You can eat delicious sushi for a few pounds, serve yourself unlimited beer, select food from a conveyor belt and even have a relaxing head massage! Sometimes there are karaoke nights here. This restaurant is bright and unromantic butgreat fun. 

Amaretto 

Food: Italian 

Price per person: Ј15-20 

A family-owned restaurant that has faithful clients coming back again and again. Amaretto offers classic Italian food in warm and friendly surroundings. Whatever time you come here, this restaurant is always busy and lively. The pizzas and pasta dishes are well recommended as being tasty and excellent value for money. Great for families or big groups of friends. 

Levant 

Food: Lebanese/Middle Eastern 

Price per person: Ј20-30 

An exotic Middle Eastern restaurant which is perfect for a romantic evening. The atmosphere is moody and intimate, with lots of candles, soft cushions and coloured glass lanterns. When you find the entrance, hidden away down a small street, you are greeted by luscious plants and the smell of incense and exotic perfumes. The menu offers a feast of authentic Lebanese food for people who like to try something new and unusual. If you stay late, you will even be able to watch a belly-dancing show! 

The George Inn 

Food: traditional British pub food 

Price per person: Ј5-10 

A dark and smoky pub, which was built in 1780. Come here if you want to taste traditional English fish and chips or steak and kidney pie in a lively atmosphere. The food isn't great, the service is slow, but this pub serves a good range of beers and ales.

Food for Thought 

Food: vegetarian 

Price per person: Ј5-10 

This tiny colourful vegetarian restaurant and takeaway offers food free of chemicals, pesticides and preservatives. The food is good and the menu changes every day, but this place is also great if you just want a coffee. Don't come here at busy times if you want a slow, leisurely meal. 

Cafй Sol 

Food: Mexican 

Price: Ј20-30 

Cafй Sol is a great place to go at any time. Enjoy authentic Mexican cuisine at lunchtime (watch out for the chilli!) or go for a drink and a dance when it gets dark. The atmosphere is always buzzing and vibrant, and the food is reasonably priced. On a Saturday night, the young crowds in Cafй Sol are usually very loud and merry after sampling the extensive list of tequilas! 

The Hard Rock Cafй 

Food: Tex-Mex and burgers 

Price per person: Ј10-20 

A genuine celebration of rock `n' roll! This is the original Hard Rock Cafй, here since the 1970s, and it's the first ever theme restaurant. The queue to get in is legendary. You can't make reservations and you will find a queue almost all day long, every day of the year. But this actually adds to the memorable experience. Once in, there's good food and a great atmosphere, created by rock music, dim lighting and walls covered in rock memorabilia

Worksheet F 

Read the restaurant reviews in worksheet E and answer the questions. 

What restaurant would you recommend for... 

a. … music fans who don't mind queueing! 

b. … a tourist wanting to try different English beers and ales. 

c. … a person looking for a fun evening and good food on a budget. 

d. … some young and hip professionals who like to dance. 

e. … an adventurous couple looking for a romantic night out. 

f. … a family looking for value for money. 

g. … a health-conscious person on a budget. 

h. … a person who enjoys spending money on high class dining.

Group task: 

Open a new restaurant! 

Work in groups of 3-5. Imagine you are going to open a new restaurant. Discuss 

and decide on the following aspects. 

? Who are your target consumers? 

? What cuisine will you serve? 

? Will you have any specialties, or a daily menu, or takeaway? 

? What type of atmosphere will you try to generate? How? 

? Will there be any entertainment? 

? What decor will you have? 

? Where will your restaurant be located? 

? How will you advertise? 

? What prices will you charge? 

? What are you going to call your restaurant? 

Be ready to present your new restaurant to the rest of the class!

Lesson plan 5

Negotiations: Building relationships 

Aims: To discuss the importance of building relationships in negotiations.

Objectives: 

- To teach some useful phrases for a range of relationship-building techniques; 

- To analyse an example of relationship-building in practice; 

- To provide practice and feedback of the situation of building a relationship in a negotiation. 

Level: Intermediate (B2) and above 

Table 11

#


Stage 


Instructions/ procedure


Time 


Materials 




1.


Introduction/ engage 


When we think of negotiations, we tend to focus on the hard negotiating skills connected with bargaining. In fact, many professional negotiators will confirm that the most important skill is effective relationship building. If there is trust and understanding between the two parties, the negotiation will be much more successful, as will the long-term business relationship between them. 


3 min





2.


Study/ Negotiations quiz


Cut up enough copies of the six questions for students to work in pairs, with one set of questions per pair. They then work through the six questions in any order they choose. After about 10 minutes, open up the discussion to include the whole class. It is a good idea to keep a record of their answers to question 1, as this will help you get a better understanding of their needs from these workshops. 


10 min


Cards 




3.


Study 


Give each pair a set of cut-up paragraphs. They then spend around five minutes matching the paragraphs with the questions. Point out that the final order of the paragraphs should be the same as the five numbered questions (i.e. 1, 2, 3, etc.). They discuss the advice in each paragraph in their pairs and then share their ideas with the class. Encourage them to share their own experiences of negotiations, especially those that involved an important relationship-building element. Finally, discuss any vocabulary problems from the text (e.g. a defensive strategy, manipulative, cheated (adj.), naivety, null and void, to go public, a bluff, haggling. 


7 min


Cards 




4.


Study 


Students work in pairs to match the techniques with the explanations and then check with the class. Go through the explanations with the class, eliciting examples of these situations from students' own experience. Discuss also what can go wrong with each technique (e.g. if they are used to


6 min


Cards 




5.


Study 


Dialogues. Students work in pairs to read the three dialogues and discuss the questions. When they have finished, discuss the questions with the class. 


7 min


Cards 




6.


Study


Work with the second extract of the dialogue 


6 min


Cards 




7.


Activate 


 Put students into pairs. They then role-play the three conversations, using the prompts. Make sure they know that the prompts are just intended as a starting point: they should develop the conversations in whatever way they find natural. Make sure also that everyone gets the chance to play the role of both the host and the guest at least once. Afterwards, ask some pairs to act out their conversations with the class. Elicit from the class how many things in common they found, and what other techniques they used. 


6 min







Worksheets - Negotiations (1): Building relationships 

1. Negotiations quiz 

1. In what situations do you negotiate? Who do you negotiate with? Think about both your work and your private life. 

2. What's the difference between sales techniques and negotiation techniques? 

3. What makes a good negotiator? 

4. How important are trust and liking in negotiations? 

5. How can you avoid being manipulated in a negotiation with a more experienced negotiator?

Language notes: 

* If a contract is declared null and void, the parties are no longer bound by it. In some legal systems (e.g. English law), there is a doctrine of fraud in the inducement, which means one party entered into the contract based on false information. If this can be proven, courts will not enforce the contract. 

* Haggling is when a buyer and seller negotiate rapidly to find a price they can agree to. This often happens in informal negotiations (e.g. buying a tourist souvenir). Typically, both parties start with very different prices, and gradually move towards a compromise price. 

2. Reading: Negotiations - the basics 

A. In practice, none of these defensive strategies may be necessary. Most good negotiators understand the importance of creating long-term trust and protecting their reputations, so they'll do their best to keep you happy. This is one reason why used car salesmen aren't as manipulative as we might expect them to be - they have a reputation to build and protect. 

B. Good negotiators build strong long-term relationships. In many ways, this is even more important than the traditional `bargaining' element of negotiations. If you leave the negotiation feeling defeated or cheated, you're not going to want to negotiate with that person again. If you find out later that the other person took advantage of your naivety, again, you're not likely to want to do business with that person. You may even try to get out of the contract you have agreed; in many situations, it is legal and normal to declare a contract null and void if you have been deceived. You're also unlikely to recommend the deceptive negotiator to other friends and colleagues, and you may even go public with the story of your bad experience, which will damage the person's reputation.

C. But if you do find yourself in a negotiation with a professional manipulator, what can you do to protect yourself? The three keys are awareness, preparation and control. Firstly, simply be aware of the situation and its risks. Think very carefully before making any commitments. Secondly, find out as much as you can before the negotiation, especially concerning prices - what price are other people offering for similar products and services? You also need to research your own needs very carefully, including a deep understanding of what you don't need. Thirdly, make sure you don't lose control. Don't be afraid to walk away from a negotiation if you're not sure, and take time to discuss your concerns with friends and colleagues. Of course, the other negotiator may tell you that you can't go away and think about it, that the decision must be made right here, right now. But that's almost always just a bluff. In a high-stakes negotiation with a professional, a rushed decision is almost always a mistake. 

D. We all negotiate all the time: with our husbands and wives, with our parents and our children, and with our friends and colleagues: What time do the kids have to go to bed?; Whose turn is it to go to the supermarket?; Can you help me with my presentation? Of course, these situations don't always feel like negotiations, not least because these are all long-term relationships. But they have a lot more in common with professional negotiations than you might think. 

E. It's interesting that this assumption doesn't work when buying a souvenir in a tourist resort, where long-term relationships don't exist - one reason why you need to be especially careful in such situations. It also doesn't really work when you're buying or selling your house or flat - the classic one-off sale with huge potential short-term gains for manipulators. Fortunately, most people aren't naturally manipulative; so again, relationship-building is almost always the best approach. 

F. On the other hand, the situations that we tend to think of as `typical negotiations', such as buying a used car, haggling over the price of an overpriced souvenir in a tourist trap, or selling your flat, are much less typical than they seem. These are all one-off negotiations, where there's no time or need to build long-term relationships. In business, almost all negotiations are long-term. Both the used car salesman and the souvenir seller are using sales techniques (or sometimes manipulation tricks). Of course selling is an important skill in life and business, as is an awareness of the tricks that other people may use. But this isn't really what negotiations are all about. 

Answers:1D 2F 3B 4A 5E 6C 

3. Relationship-building techniques 

Match the techniques for building relationships on the left with the explanations on the right. 

Table 12

1. Finding things in common 


a. Research has shown that if you give something to another person, they almost always feel obliged to return the favour … or even a much bigger favour. Of course, there's a limit: you can't be too cynical and expect someone to knock 10% off their asking price just because you've bought them a nice coffee. But a little genuine kindness can go a long way. 




2. Showing an interest 


b. There's no doubt that we like people who are like us. In other words, if we can identify with them and understand them as people, not just business machines, we're much more likely to want to do business with them. In practical terms, there are two sides to this technique: one is to ask questions to find out about the other person. But just as importantly, we need to be open about ourselves, to help the other person to understand us too.




3. Flattery


c. This can go both ways. Firstly, show that you're treating the other person as an individual, someone special. That means remembering their name, and maybe organising something based on the likes and dislikes they've expressed. Secondly, show that they're dealing with you as a person, not just your organisation. If you're taking them to your favourite restaurant, make sure they understand that it's not just an anonymous place to eat, but something that you've chosen personally, which says something about who you are. 




4.Generosity


d. Say nice things about the other person or their organisation. If that person bought you a meal, tell a third person how nice the meal was and how much you enjoyed the conversation. If you've just arrived in their office, say how nice it is. If you notice a diploma on the wall, ask about it and make sure you sound impressed when they tell you. But whatever you do, make sure you sound convincing - there's nothing worse than false enthusiasm!




5. Gratitude 


e. When the other person is talking about himself/herself, we need to listen carefully and show that we are listening. This means not just making `listening noises' like `I see' and `Really?', but actually being interested in the other person. Remember what the are telling you, so you can bring it up next time you meet (e.g. How's our daughter getting on at university?). 




6. Personal touches


f. Whenever the other person is kind to you, always make sure you say thank-you. It may seem like a tiny detail, and perhaps an obvious one, but in fact it can make all the difference. Just imagine how you'd feel if someone failed to thank you for your own kindness! And when you say thank-you, don't just say `thank-you'. Tell them how kind they've been and how much you appreciate it.






Answers:1b 2e 3d 4a 5f 6c

4. Dialogues 

Fiona Jackson is in Munich to negotiate the sale of up to five large industrial packaging machines to a large manufacturing company. Read these three extracts from her conversation with Hans Braun, the Director of Operations. 

Answer the questions for each extract. 

Extract 1 

1. How do Hans and Fiona flatter each other? What adjectives do they use? 

2. How do they respond to each other's flattery? What grammatical structure do they both use? 

3. Why do you think they focused on flattering each other's companies?

H: Ah, hello. Ms Jackson? I'm Hans, Hans Braun. 

F: Good to meet you at last, Hans, after all those emails. And please call me Fiona. 

H: OK, welcome to Munich, Fiona. Sorry to keep you waiting, by the way. I had an urgent phone call and couldn't get away. 

F: No problem. I was just admiring your brochure. It's really impressive. I didn't know you had so many famous clients! 

H: Thanks. Yes, well, we've got a great sales team, and we really go for quality in a big way here, much more than some of our cheaper competitors. 

F: Well, it certainly seems to be an effective strategy, judging by these recommendations. 

H: Thank-you. Yes, they're very positive, aren't they? We've also heard some great things about your company. I was looking at your website yesterday, and I thought it was really interesting. I loved the `Our story' section, you know, the story about how your founder started the business from nothing. Fascinating. 

F: Yes, it's amazing, isn't it? I'm glad you read that - it means you've got a better idea about our approach to business. 

Extract 2 

4. What do you think of Hans's opening question? How else could he start a 

conversation to find things in common? 

5. How many things in common did they find? 

6. What phrases do they use to show interest? 

7. What techniques did they use to echo what the other person said? 

8. What example of generosity and gratitude is in the conversation? 

9. How easy would it be for Hans and Fiona to continue this conversation? 

Why? 

H: So, is this your first time in Munich, Fiona? 

F: Well, yes and no. I came with my family when I was about 14, but … well, that was a very long time ago. I don't remember much about it … just museums and football.

H: Football? Are you a fan? 

F: Not really. But my dad was … I mean he still is, obsessed with it. So he took us to matches all over Europe. 

H: Wow. That's really interesting! I'm also a little obsessed with football, but I don't drag my kids around to watch matches! 

F: No, it wasn't so bad. It meant we got to see lots of interesting places. How many kids have you got? 

H: Three: two girls and a boy. They're growing up fast. My eldest daughter is at university already. 

F: Really? You must be very proud. My kids are still very small, so I've got all that to look forward to. What does your daughter study? 

H: English, would you believe? She wants to study in Bristol next year. 

F: Bristol? That's interesting. My brother studied there. He had a wonderful time. It's a really nice city. I could ask him if he's got any advice, you know, where to go, where to avoid. 

H: Well, that would be excellent. I'd really appreciate that. You know what it's like to be a parent - you never stop worrying about your kids. 

F: Absolutely. My son's going on karate camp next week, his first time away from mum and dad, and I'm really stressed about it. He's only nine. 

H: Karate camp? Sounds interesting. I used to do a bit of karate myself, many years ago. Is he good at it? 

Suggested answers: 

1. Fiona says nice things about the brochure (impressive), including the client list and recommendation; Hans is nice about the website (really interesting, fascinating), and shows that he took the time to read it and understand its relevance. 

2. They accept the flattery and develop the theme, using question tags (aren't they?,isn't it?). Note that this is only possible because they have flattered each other's organisations. It would be inappropriate to use this to talk about oneself (e.g. Yes, I am good company, aren't I?) 

3. It's a safe topic. Personal flattery may make people uncomfortable, especially if viewed as flirting. It's also very difficult to continue a conversation after someone flatters you, without sounding egoistic. 

4. It's an ideal question because it's open-ended, and naturally leads to an interesting and relevant conversation. Most other questions (e.g. Do you like sport? Do you have a family?) can lead to dead ends (e.g. No, I don't). Other good openers involve asking about the journey or the hotel. If you are the visitor, you can ask questions about the company (e.g. So, how many people do you have here?) or the location (e.g. Are you from this city? Is it a good place to live?). 

5. At least four: football; children (and worrying about their children); Bristol; karate. 

6. Wow. That's really interesting!; Really?; That's interesting; Sounds interesting

7. They both echoed actual words and phrases (e.g. Football? Bristol? Krate camp?). They also picked up on words and phrases that the other person used (e.g. obsessed, kids (instead of children)). They also related their experiences to the other person's, to show they were paying attention (e.g. I don't drag my kids around to watch matches!; I've got all that to look forward to; You know what it's like to be a parent). 

8. Generosity: I could ask him if he's got any advice. Gratitude: Well, that would be excellent. I'd really appreciate that. 

9. Very easy. They have many topics that they could come back to

5. work in pairs. Use these ideas to role-play similar conversation. Try to use the six relationship-building techniques as often as you can. When you've finished, swap roles and repeat the role-plays.

Conversation 1: 

A: Greet the other person. Apologise for being late. 

B: Say something nice about the brochure / the office / something you can see (e.g. a diploma on the wall) 

A: Say something nice about the other person's organisation. 

B: Continue the conversation.

Conversation 2: 

A: So, is this your first time in …? 

B: Yes>Explain what happened No, but I have been to … No, but I've heard a lot about it. Isn't there a …? 

A: Continue the conversation. 

Conversation 3: 

A: Explain your plans for the day's events. Offer something generous (e.g. a nice meal, some evening entertainment, a symbolic present). 

B: Express gratitude. 

A: Make person B feel special. 

B: Try to return the favour. 

A: Continue the conversation.

Conclusion

The ever-growing need for good communication skills in second language acquisition has created a huge demand for foreign languages teaching around the word. And opportunities to learn a foreign language are provided in many different ways. 

It can be concluded that all mentioned methods are being practiced today. But any method shouldn't be used too often. A good teacher should use a variety of approaches and techniques and make an atmosphere of foreign language communication for the students. Along with the approaches and methods of teaching foreign language teacher should also consider principles in teaching second language acquisition.

Traditional methods of teaching such as lecture does not help students make connections or feel empathy towards the material like role-playing, games, discourse, KVN, but is necessary at times when for the material there is no other way to teach than to lecture. 

Also teacher may use combined model of FLT classes to solve several problems of teaching. This lesson can be combined with control, knowledge creation, consolidation and improvement of knowledge and skill development, summarizing the results of training, definition of homework. In my opinion this model of classes is the best for most materials. But, of course there are materials in teaching of which teacher should choose specific techniques and approaches. 

Such methods as discussion is another teaching method that can be effective because they can be challenging, promote learning and encourage tolerance. 

The purpose of this work was to discover the effective methods of teaching a foreign language to children. 

To make pupils get interested in subject the huge role is played by the person of a teacher. Therefore the pledge of successful mastering a foreign language by the students is professionalism of the teacher which should in the work not only take into account the methodical principles underlying teaching, but also to be in constant search of new receptions and means of teaching which will cover a lesson, will make it fascinating, cognitive and remembered. 

The most useful for this purpose are the following receptions and methods: methods of constructivism, communicative methods, methods of projects and discussions, games and role games, etc.

In the course work I have been analyzed all these methods and the receptions quality of training to foreign language on the basis of studying of various techniques of teaching, used in work with pupils. Many of receptions can be applies with success at teaching children of younger and more advanced age.

Every teacher chooses his own way to work with students and the more appropriate methods and type of the lesson.

The success in teaching depends both on lesson program and on how teacher presents the lesson and uses various techniques to manage the class more enjoyable and interesting. 

References

1. State program of education development in the republic of Kazakhstan for 2011-2020

2. Moon J. (2005) Children Learning English. Macmillan.

3. Scrivener J. (2011) Learning Teaching. Macmillan

4. Ur P. (1996) A Course in Language Teaching. Cambridge: CUP

5. Jeremy Harmer, The practice of English language teaching, ch.6, p.78

6. Harmer J. (2001) How to Teach English.(7th ed.) England, Edinburg

7. Rigg P. &Hudelson, S. 1986. One child doesn't speak English. Australian Journal of Reading. 9, 3, pp. 116-125.

8. Polat E.S. projectmethodin FLTL/Foreign languages in school № 2, 3 - 2000г.

9. Scrivener, Jim. Learning Teaching. Oxford: Macmillan, 2005.

10. Broughton, Geoffrey, et al. Teaching English as a Foreign Language. 2nd ed. London:Routledge, 1994

11. Kudrickaya M.I. First-aid kit for school practicum, Kostanai 2010, p.5

12. The Communicative Approach in English as a Foreign Language Teaching. Retried March 3, 2009

13. Larsen-Freeman, D. (2000). Techniques and principles in language teaching. (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

14. Trakia Journal of Sciences, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp 28-31 , 2004 A lingua-didactic model for foreign languageeducation of preschool age children

15. Mora J.K. (2008). Second language teaching method. Principle & Procedures. (San Diego State University) Retrieved February 12, 2009

16. Littlewood W. 1981. Communicative language Teaching. CUP, p. 45-46

17. David Nunan. Communicative Language Teaching - 2204

18. Celce-Murcia M. (2001). Teaching English as a second or foreign language. (Boston: Heinle&Heinle), p.3

19. Livingstone, C. Role play in language learning, (1986). P. 54-57

20. VieraBoumovб, Traditional vs. Modern Teaching Methods: Advantages and Disadvantages of Each (2008)

21. H. DOUGLAS BROWN, Principles of language learning and teaching, 4th edition, ch.5

22. Diana Larsen-Freeman, Techniques & Principles in language teaching, 2nd edition.

Размещено на Allbest.ru
								
									
										Страница:  1   2 
										
									
								