

	 D. Find in the text phrases containing “to get” and memorize different meanings of the verb.
	 

 
×èòàéòå òàêæå:A. How would you personally start job hunting? Use the phrases in the box to help you.A. Read the facts about Russia and discuss in pairs. Use the Language Skills phrases above.Active word list. Read the words and word combinations and memorize them.Active word list. Read the words and word combinations and memorize them.Active word list. Read the words and word combinations and memorize them.B. Match the definitions with the italicized words and phrases from the text.C. Look in the text and find the following words and phrases.Complex sentences. Different ways of connection clauses.D. Find words in the text which have similar meanings to those in 1)-10).E. Find in the text 10 ed-forms of English verbs and translate them into Russian paying attention to different functions they perform in the sentences.E. Look at the words in Column A and their meanings. These words can define numbers more exactly. Match phrases in column A with their translation in column B.






 to get smth
 to get somewhere
 to get smb into smth
 to get/make smb do smth
 to get to know smth
 to get acquainted with
 I’ve got a car.
 I’ve got to do this right now.
   ïîëó÷àòü/äîñòàâàòü/ïîêóïàòü ÷òî-ëèáî
 äîáèðàòüñÿ êóäà-ëèáî
 çàìàíèòü/âîâëå÷ü êîãî-ëèáî â
 çàñòàâèòü êîãî-ëèáî äåëàòü ÷òî-ëèáî
 óçíàòü î ÷åì-ëèáî
 ïîçíàêîìèòüñÿ ñ
 Ó ìåíÿ åñòü ìàøèíà.
 ß äîëæåí ñäåëàòü ýòî ïðÿìî ñåé÷àñ.
  E. Find in the text phrasal verbs which mean: íèêîãäà íå îñòàíàâëèâàòüñÿ ïåðåä, èñòîùèòü çàïàñ, ðàñïðîäàâàòü, ïðèâëåêàòü/çàèíòåðåñîâàòüand use them in the sentences of your own.
					F. Say whether the following statements are true, false or there is no information on the subject in the text.
					1) There are a lot of ways to sell goods and services.
 2) To attract manufacturers, some shops organize sales at discount prices.
 3) Internet shopping is the most popular nowadays.
 4) Advertising accelerates economic growth.
 G. Say which paragraphs contain the information on:
 1) How much Americans spend on advertising.
 2) Different ways of product promotion and encouraging people to buy it.
 3) What can help to succeed in selling.
 TEXT 10 HOUSING, MORTGAGES[46]



A. Read and translate the text.  | ñëåäóþùàÿ ==> A. Read and translate the text.
Äàòà äîáàâëåíèÿ: 2015-07-04; ïðîñìîòðîâ: 31; Îïóáëèêîâàííûé ìàòåðèàë íàðóøàåò àâòîðñêèå ïðàâà?.

Íå íàøëè òî, ÷òî èñêàëè? Âîñïîëüçóéòåñü ïîèñêîì:
Íå õîòèòå "ïàðèòüñÿ"? çàêàæèòå ïëàòíóþ ðàáîòó!
	Ëó÷øèå èçðå÷åíèÿ: Òîëüêî ñîí ïðèáëåæàåò ñòóäåíòà ê êîíöó ëåêöèè. À ÷óæîé õðàï åãî îòäàëÿåò.  1541 -  | 1478 -  èëè ÷èòàòü âñå...
  