
            ﻿ABSTRACTS
Afonina I.A. Translation Model of Rhythmic and Phonetic Peculiarities of the Original in Fiction Translation
The article is devoted to the problems of formalized description of French rhythmic and phonetic speech characteristics in translation fiction into Russian. Translation model of rhythmic and phonetic peculiarities of the original in fiction translation is suggested as a result of theoretical study and experimental research of the problem.
Dubrovskaya O.N. Ritualistic Character as the Property of Complex Speech Events
The paper reveals the main properties and generic features of complex speech events. Complex speech events form a specific type of communicative events that structure social interaction. The main gradual property of such events is their ritual character. The author defines functions of ritual within event framework and the significance of ritualistic communication in institutional context with reference to complex speech events.
Erofeeva T.I. Language Unit in Gender Approach
The research is based on the idea of the “sociolect” - the category that gives the possibility to take into consideration all the stratified variety of society, including the “gender”. The result of this research is in the examination of the place of the factor “gender” in the general model of the city’s “sociolect”. This model is based on the statistical method ANOVA. Particular models of sociolect represent the more detailed description of the “gender” factor influence.
Fateeva I.A. Philologists and Journalists in the First Russian Institute for Journalists
The article is devoted to the contribution of some philologists and journalists to the first Russian journalist institute creation and functioning. They are the rectors K.P. Novitsky, D.A. Rozanov, V.A. Nodel, the teachers M.I. Gus, M.U. Levidov, M.I. Shchelkunov, A.I. Zonin, the journalists and political functioners U.M. Steklov, S.B. Ingulov, A.V. Lunacharsky, M.S. Olminsky, L.S. Sosnovsky etc.
Golovanova E.I. Typology of Professional Communication Units: Cognitive and Pragmatic Aspect
The article is devoted to the analysis of the three main categories of professional vocabulary: terms, professionalisms (professional words) and professional jargon words from the point of view of their pragmatic and cognitive characteristics. The suggested approach allows explaining the functional regularities of each category in the spheres of professional communication.
Glukhikh N.V. Epistolary Business Text of the Late XVIII - Early XIX Centuries: on the Qualification Problem
The article considers the issue of qualification of business epistolary text of the late XVIII - early XIX centuries as a peculiar text in the system of business correspondence works, its key features and stylistic nature. The brief analysis of the epistolary text research in humanities is given. The notion of epistolary business text is formulated from the viewpoint of language history and linguistic source studies.
Kasyanova L.Y. The Evaluative Semantics of a New Word
The evaluative semantics of new words which appeared in the Russian language at the end
of XX - the beginning of XXI century is considered, the linguistic nature of evaluation is studied in the article. The occurrence of neologisms is perceived as anthropothentrically focused mechanism which has a special applicability: to serve and express evaluative intentions alongside with the nominative ones of the native speakers.
Khanafeeva A. M. Arabic Linguistic Tradition
The problem of developing the Arabic linguistic tradition is discussed in the article. Schools in which the theory of the Arabic linguistics was developed are represented and the influence of the Arabic linguistics on the heritage of traditions is described, the study of Arabic linguistics in the Arab states is viewed.
Kiuru K.V. Image Political Media Text: Institutionalization of the Concept and Genre Typology
The concept “Image political media text” is grounded and introduced in the article. The concept “Image political media text” unites PR-texts and advertising texts. This type of text is always initiated by the subject of political activity and contains selected and optimum information. Genre typology of the image political media texts is given.
Lutovinova O.V. On Language and Cultural Personality Types of Virtual Discourse
Nowadays virtual communication becomes not only a new channel of information transmission but a specific cultural and lingual environment. Due to this fact many different approaches to its investigation appear in modern linguistics. The article views cultural personality types of virtual discourse as a means of conceptualizing this new reality.
Malafeev F.Yu. The Author’s Lexis Reconception Motivated by Sensory-Perceptive Sphere of Consciousness (on the Example of D. Samoylov’s Poetic Creation)
The article is devoted to the analysis of the author's individual semantic reconception of lexical units, motivated by sensory-perceptive sphere of consciousness. A classification of types of the specified kind of semantic reconception is introduced. Poetic texts of a well-known poet of the twentieth century D. Samoilov are taken as the material for analysis. The methods of investigation are cognitive and semantic (component) analysis.
Matveeva A.S. Ontologic Feelings of the Child in the Novel by Charles Dickens "David Kopperfild"
The article deals with the opportunity to study Dickens’s works from the position of ontological poetics. At the heart of this approach is the concept of ontological feeling which is the most truthful experience of life when the world is perceived directly as it appears. In Dickens's works such experience is realized in representing the world by the child.
Myaksheva O.V. Peculiarities of the Spatial Orientation in Spoken Language
The specificity of spatial orientation representation is examined in the article based on the material of everyday spoken language. It is asserted that the space of spoken language is private, absolute and objective at the same time. Specificity is connected with the peculiarities of the communication sphere and the surroundings, spontaneity, frankness and emotionality.
Nikolayeva N.G. Traditions of the Slavonic Translation Culture in the XVIII th Century (on the Material of Corpus Areopagiticum Translation)
The article discusses on material of translated theological literature the embodiment of the traditional methods generated in Slavonic translational culture as stylistic means during the epoch of the modern literary language formation. The special attention is given to the text expansion. It shows connections of paradigmatic language relations formation and strengthening and syntagmatic features of the text.
Petkova E. N. The Weak Grade of Ablaut in Forming Germanic Strong Verbs Preterit with a Special Reference to VI Class Formation
The article deals with the weak grade of Indoeuropean ablaut (vowel gradation) and its development in Protogermanic. The author makes an attempt to explain the origin of the preterit models of Germanic strong verbs, where the weak grade consistently presents itself, in the phonological (genetical) and morphological (functional) aspects.
Prokofyeva L.P. The Sound and Colour Picture of the World in Speech
The results of research of sound and colour associations in speech are offered on the material of experimental data obtained by the author. The hypothesis of synesthetic picture of the world existence is viewed on the basis of universal and nationally motivated patterns.
Sadchenko V.T. The Problem of Stylistic Permeability of Texts (Based on Works of Fiction by A.I. Solzhenitsin)
Peculiarities of structuraliation of fiction as well as the usage of nonverbal signs (priority metaindexes and means accompanying footnotes) are analyzed in the article as a phenomenon of style permeability, namely as a manifestation of the scientific style on fiction influence.
Samigullina A.S. The Theory of Metaphor in Present-Day English-based Linguistics: Postulates, Approaches, Perspectives
The present article focuses on the analysis of the basic metaphor theories in modern English-based linguistics. The theories under consideration not only determine the scope of metaphoricity, but also make for gaining a better insight into the problem of linguistic conceptualization and categorization.
Sergieva, N.S. Representation of TIME in the Russian Language Consciousness Core
The article deals with the problem of language consciousness and its ethnic and cultural specificity investigated with associative experiment. The author presents the core of Russian language consciousness. The structure of this core is investigated with the semantic Gestalt method. The author offers a pattern of semantic analysis of the words of the Gestalt TIME zone.
Selyutin A.A. Forum as a Genre of Virtual Communication
The article defines forum as a genre of virtual communication and reveals peculiarities of the given genre in the process of virtual contact.
Sozina T.N. «Touching» as means of revealing the author’s voice in F.M. Dostoevsky’s novel «Karamazov Brothers»
An attempt to consider the category of «touching» as means of revealing the author’s
voice in fiction is made. M. Bakhtin’s polyphonic principle realized in F.M. Dostoevsky’s work through the dialogue position of the author is applied in the analysis.
Strelets L.I. Ways of the World Modeling in the Story “The Great Helmet” by Leonid Andreyev: Genre Aspect
The story “The Great Helmet” by Leonid Andreyev is analyzed from the position of metonymic, metaphoric and associative principles of the world modeling. These principles correlate with the following genre supports: topic and problematics, space-temporal structure of the text, subjective structure of the text. The story is viewed at the intersection of realistic and expressionistic traditions.
Suleneva N.V. Television Discourse Intertextuality in the Theatre Direction Space
The influence of the producer’s analysis of the literary work traditions in creating television stage discourse is analyzed in the article. This approach leads to the best tools for the literary source screen version deconstruction.
Sumskoy P. F. Verbal and Communicative Aspect of TV Space Performance
This article describes performance character of TV program containing creative potential for intellectual, art and verbal-communicative activity of spectators. This approach determines the ways of interaction among the subjects, has a great effect on TV-communicational activity, creates the possibility for a TV viewer to become a participant of a TV-program.
Tsarevskaja T. Ju. Cycle of the Pentecostarion in the frescoes of the Church of St. Theodore Stratelates in Novgorod
The material of the article deals with the iconographic program of the altar decoration of the outstanding fresco ensemble of the 14th century, the Church of St. Theodore Stratelates in Novgorod. The subject of the investigation is the cycle of the Pentecostarion composed of the narrative series of the scenes of the Christ’s Passions and the sequence of the Gospel events celebrated during the period from the Easter to the Pentecost.
Urvantzeva O. A. The Principle of Modeling in Church-Concert Music (on the Example of Tchaikovsky’s Liturgy)
The special features of concert composition in the works of XIX’th century Russian composers are considered in the article. The church works are created on the pattern of choir genres (liturgy cycles, Vespers and some psalms), but with the use of the music language of temporal genres. The revelation of the model, which was used by the composer for the creation of the church compositions, helps to amplify the author’s conception and to establish the correlation between the canonical and individual stylistic components in church music.
Vaganova E.V. Reflection of Language Consciousness Peculiarities in the Corporate Texts
The article is devoted to the research of language consciousness peculiarities of technical and humanitarian specialities representatives. A method of research is the directed analysis of corporate texts on the text examples from the Internet-sites of faculties of a higher educational institution. The research allows to understand the faculty’s corporate culture peculiarities.
Vlasova O.B. The Phenomenon of Arbitrary Motivation in the Modern Russian Language
The necessity of the idea of arbitrary formal and semantic motivation introduction is stated, linguistic conditions of mechanism operation are determined, degrees of arbitrary motivation are established and influencing potential of curtailed homonyms is characterized in the article. Didactic and communicative problems generated by unintentional or erroneous arbitrary motivation are discussed.
Zalesova N.M. Gentleman Concept Gender Peculiarity in the American Language Consciousness (Associative Approach)
The article deals with the gender specific concept gentleman viewed through the prism of an associative experiment within the frame of American culture studies.