The Price Of Freedom Essay, Research Paper 
What is the price of freedom that was paid, and is being paid? Freedom was paid with anguish, pain, time, and lives. We, the inhabitants of America, are fortunate to see this land where we have unalienable human rights that are just basic and essential statutes. There is always a cost for something; furthermore there is a price on our freedom. We pay taxes, follow the land and society??s regulations, vote, and so on. The topic of importance and eminence is how, why, and what paid for our freedom. 
Women have come a long way from being ??House-Wives.?? In many countries, women have little or no power, or role. Furthermore, that is why this country, America, gives freedom to women to carry their own individual dreams out. They paid for their current freedom, suffrage, and liberty by peaceful, yet passionate and touching demonstrating. They have paved the way for the future to evolve and develop. 
Immigrants have paid for their freedom by working, or literally paying for it. It costs these new immigrants a pretty penny to migrate to the so-called ??Land of Opportunity,?? and worked harder than anyone else just to exist and survive here. New societal regulations and government rules just make it harder for newcomers to assimilate to their new lives. This country is built on immigration and their hard labor work, using people ranging from Black slaves to Hispanic workers on the streets waiting for jobs. Furthermore, without them many tasks would have not been achieved. The Chinese for example migrated here and built the first railroads, in addition they worked on sugar plantations of Hawaii, only increasing Uncle Sam??s wallet. All for their freedom and liberty in America. 
World War I, World War II, Vietnam War, Korean War, American Revolution, Civil War, French & Indian War, and so on. These wars all occurred for one main reason, to protect the people and their endowed rights. If brave and courageous warriors did not step on to the battlefield, and sacrifice themselves to their country, who knows what could have happened. Pain was suffered, families were separated, and veterans were hopelessly injured. Why did they suffer torment and defile conditions? To rid the depravity and keep our Freedom! 
In conclusion, I feel that no one should be able to take away freedom. Too often this happens in other countries, that are less fortunate of this great democratic lifestyle. Imagine life without freedom, there being only strict discipline and harsh punishments.


