Interest Groups Essay, Research Paper 
Interest Groups 
Interest Group is defined as “an organized body of individuals who try 
to influence public policy.” This system is designed so that interest groups 
would be an instrument of public influence on politics to create changes, but 
would not threaten the government much. Whether this is still the case or not 
is an important question that we must find out. Interest groups play many 
different roles in the American political system, such as representation, 
participation, education, and program monitoring. Representation is the 
function that we see most often and the function we automatically think of when 
we think of interest groups. Participation is another role that interest groups 
play in our government, which is when they facilitate and encourage the 
participation of their members in the political process. Interest groups also 
educate, by trying to inform both public officials and the public at large about 
matters of importance to them. Lobby groups also keep track of how programs are 
working in the field and try to persuade government to take action when problems 
become evident when they monitor programs. The traditional interest groups have 
been organized around some form of economic cause, be it corporate interests, 
associates, or unions. The number of business oriented lobbies has grown since 
the 1960s and continues to grow. Public-interest groups have also grown 
enormously since the 1960s. Liberal groups started the trend, but conservative 
groups are now just as common, although some groups are better represented 
through interest groups than others are. There are many ways that the groups 
can influence politics too. The increase in interest group activity has 
fragmented the political debate into little pockets of debates and have served 
to further erode the power of political parties, who try to make broad based 
appeals. PACs also give money to incumbents, which means that incumbents can 
accumulate large reelection campaign funds, that in result, discourages 
potential challengers. As a result, most incumbents win, not because they 
outspend their challengers, but because they keep good potential opponents out 
of the race. Conservatives are one of the big groups that influence politics 
and for many reasons. 
Conservative thinking has not only claimed the presidency; it has spread 
throughout our political and intellectual life and stands poised to become the 
dominant strain in American public policy. While the political ascent of 
conservatism has taken place in full public view, the intellectual 
transformation has for the most part occurred behind the scenes, in a network of 
think tanks whose efforts have been influential to an extent that only five 
years after President Reagan’s election, begins to be clear. 
Conservative think tanks and similar organizations have flourished 
since the mid-1970s. The American Enterprise Institute (AEI) had twelve 
resident thinkers when Jimmy Carter was elected; today it has forty-five, and a 
total staff of nearly 150. The Heritage Foundation has sprung from nothing to 
command an annual budget of $11 million. The budget of the Center for Strategic 
and International Studies (CSIS) has grown from $975,000 ten years ago to $8.6 
million today. Over a somewhat longer period the endowment of the Hoover 
Institution has increased from $2 million to $70 million. At least twenty-five 
other noteworthy public-policy groups have been formed or dramatically expanded 
through the decade; nearly all are anti-liberal. 
No other country accords such significance to private institutions 
designed to influence public decisions. Brookings, began in the 1920s with 
money from the industrialist Robert S. Brookings, a Renaissance man who aspired 
to bring discipline of economics to Washington. During the New Deal the 
Brookings Institution was marked-oriented–for example, it opposed Roosevelt’s 
central planning agency, the National Resources Planning Board. Only much later 
did the institution acquire a reputation as the head of liberalism. 
Through the 1950s and 1960s, as Americans enjoyed steady increases in 
their standard of living and U.S. industry reigned over world commerce, 
Washington came to consider the economy a dead issue. Social justice and 
Vietnam dominated the agenda: Brookings concentrated on those fields, emerging 
as a chief source of arguments in favor of the Great Society and opposed to U.S. 
involvement in Vietnam. In the Washington swirl where few people have the time 
to read the reports they debate, respectability is often proportional to tonnage. 
The more studies someone tosses on the table, the more likely he is to win his 
point. For years Brookings held a dominance on tonnage. Its papers supporting 
liberal positions went unchallenged by serious conservative rebuttals. 
As the 1970s progressed, a core of politically active conservative 
intellectuals, most prominently Irving Kristol, began to argue in publications 
like The Public Interest and The Wall Street Journal that if business wanted 
market logic to regain the initiative, it would have to create a new class of 
its own –scholars whose career prospects depended on private enterprise, not 
government or the universities. “You get what you pay for, Kristol in effect 
argued, and if businessmen wanted intellectual horsepower, they would have to 
open their pocketbooks.”1 
The rise of Nader’s Raiders and similar public-interest groups–which 
achieved remarkable results, considering how badly outgunned they were; brought 
a change in business thinking about money and public affairs. So did the 
frustration felt by oil companies, which were being fattened by rising prices 
but still dreamed of being fatter if federal regulations were abolished. They 
were willing to invest some of their riches in changing Washington’s mood. 
Women also have a voice in their own interest groups. The Woman 
Suffrage movement was headed up by many groups that differed in some of their 
views. The moderate branch was by far the largest and is given most of the 
credit for the Nineteenth Amendment. Under the banner of the National Women’s 
Party, the militant feminists had used civil disobedience, colorful 
demonstrations and incessant lobbying to get the Nineteenth Amendment out of 
Congress. 
These are just some of the ways that American politics in the twentieth 
century was influenced by special interest groups. Interest groups have grown 
this much in this century and will probably keep progressing in the coming 
centuries. 
Bibliography 
1.Groliers Encyclopedia on CD-Rom, 1993 Grolier Inc., Software Toolworks 
Inc. 
2.Ideas Move Nations, The Atlantic Monthly, 1986
325


